section seven analysis of Lee Harvey
Oswald's activities in Mexico City a
introduction after the Warren Commission
published its report two very important
allegations related to Lee Harvey
Oswald's activities in Mexico City came
to the attention of the United States
investigative agencies in 1964 Elena
Guerrero de Paz reported that she had
seen Lee Harvey Oswald accompanied by
two other men at a party at the home of
reuben duran navarro the brother-in-law
of silvia duran in 1967 oskar Contreras
Lartigue reported that he met Lee Harvey
Oswald on the campus of the National
Autonomous University of Mexico in
addition the testimony of the Warren
Commission's primary witness related to
Mexico City silvia tirado duran has been
called into question by the critics
throughout the years some of the
information that is inconsistent with
mr. Ann's original story that Oswald
visited the consulate on two occasions
which were the only times she saw him
was available at the time of the Warren
Commission's inquiry although it was
ignored some of the information has
developed after the publication of the
Warren Report the Gaudreau and Contreras
allegations in conjunction with the
inconsistencies of mr. rands story raise
three major questions one did Lee Harvey
Oswald or an imposter visit the Cuban
consulate in Mexico City
two other than his visits to the Cuban
consulate what were Lee Harvey Oswald's
activities in Mexico City and three was
Lee Harvey Oswald traveling alone in
Mexico these three questions overlap
somewhat in detail eg if Oswald was not
traveling alone did one of his
companions impersonate him at the Cuban
consulate nonetheless each of the three
questions will be dealt with in separate
sections below in an attempt to answer
these questions the House Select
Committee on assassinations has won
interviewed Mexican and cube
citizens who could have knowledge of
Oswald's visits to the Cuban consulate
to interviewed Mexican citizens who
could have knowledge of Oswald's
activities and associations in Mexico
City 3 conducted an extensive review of
the files of the Central Intelligence
Agency and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation that pertained to Oswald's
sojourn in Mexico City B did Lee Harvey
Oswald or an imposter contact the Cuban
and Soviet consulates in Mexico City Lee
Harvey Oswald himself probably visited
the Cuban consulate at least once since
his application for a Cuban in transit
visa bares his signature footnote the
handwriting panel concluded that the
signature on the visa application was
identical to other samples of Lee Harvey
Oswald's handwriting and footnote though
the Cuban consulate allowed visa
applicants to take blank applications
out of the consulate to be returned when
completed Silvia Duran stated she was
certain that Oswald signed the
application in her presence footnote HS
CA interview of silvia duran june 6 1978
JFK document 0 1 1 7075 con su s q
stated that standard operating procedure
at the Cuban consulate did not allow
applications to be removed from the
office HS CA public testimony of loose
[ __ ] SQ september 18 1978 page 41 in
footnote Oswald's signature on the Cuban
visa application however does not by
itself rule out the possibility that
someone impersonated Oswald and contacts
with the Cuban and Soviet embassies an
analysis of the telephone conversations
which the CIA's Mexico City station
intercepted by tapping the Soviet
consulate and the Soviet military
anti-phase telephone reveals that
someone later identified by the CIA as
Oswald visited the Cuban consulate at
least two times and the Soviet consulate
at least three times on September 27th
1963 at 4:05 p.m.
via Duran called the Soviet consulate in
this conversation she referred to an
American seeking an in transit visa to
Cuba the substantive information given
indicates that she was discussing Oswald
at this time the individual using
Oswald's name already had been at the
Soviet embassy at least once since
Sylvia requested the name of the Soviet
embassy official who dealt with the
American Sylvia also stated that the
American was at that time in the Cuban
consulate at 4:26 p.m. a Soviet consular
official returned Sylvia Duran's call
this official stated specifically that
Oswald had visited the Soviet consulate
on September 28th 1963 at 11:51 a.m.
Sylvia Duran called the Soviet consulate
she put the American later identified as
Oswald on the telephone the American who
was at the Cuban consulate at the time
said that he had just been at the Soviet
consulate the conversation ended with
the Americans stating that he was
returning to the Soviet consulate
analysis of Sylvia Duran's and s [ __ ] s
qs testimony would tend to indicate that
Oswald or someone impersonating him
visited the Cuban consulate at least one
and possibly two additional times on
September 27th 1963
Sylvia Duran says that Oswald first
visited the Cuban consulate at
approximately 11:00 a.m.
requesting an in transit visa to Cuba
with Russia as the final destination
mister Ann sent Oswald to obtain
photographs that he needed for the visa
application his SEBI osq recalls that
this visit probably occurred on the date
on the visa application September 27
1963 mr. Wran also stated that Oswald
returned at approximately 1:00 p.m. with
four photographs sa Bo asked you also
stated that the individual later
identified as Oswald returned to the
Cuban consulate about 1:00 p.m. with the
photographs probably on the date that
appears on the application that is to
say on the 27th the committee believes
that there is a possible
that the argument between ask you and
the individual occurred during this
visit mr. an stated that Oswald's third
and last visit occurred in the late
afternoon after working hours on the
27th this visit is confirmed by the
CIA's tap on the Soviet consulate in
addition to the alleged Oswald visits to
the consulates there were other
telephonic contacts that may have been
between Oswald or an impersonator and
the consulates several details about
Oswald's visits to the Cuban consulate
and telephonic contacts with both
consulates suggest that the individual
involved may not have been Oswald
Sylvia Darren's description of Oswald
did not resemble Oswald's true physical
appearance this description which
appeared early in the reporting of
information obtained from mr. an was
deleted from subsequent reports and was
not at all mentioned in the Warren
Report see section V see for details ass
[ __ ] excuse description of Oswald was
similar to Sylvia Duran's but more
detailed perhaps the most remarkable
thing about these descriptions is their
similarity to Elaine agarra Depaz
description of one of Oswald's alleged
companions another possible indication
that an imposter may also have visited
the consulate is the September 28th 1963
intercepted conversation
Sylvia Duran adamantly denies that
Oswald or any other American visited the
Cuban consulate on Saturday September
28th 1963 in light of the CIA intercept
of that date miss Duran has either lied
to the committee or the individual who
visited the consulate on September 28th
was not oswald footnote the CIA's
classification of the transcript of this
conversation prevented the HS CA from
directly confronting mr. Wran with the
information and footnote mr. n in light
of the inconsistencies detailed in
sections 5c and 6a above may not be the
most credible witness but there are
indications that she was truthful when
she stated that Oswald
visit the consulate on September 28th
the September 28th 1963 conversation was
linked to Oswald because of the marginal
notations made by the CIA translator on
the transcript the translator noted on
the transcript that the color spoke
terrible hardly recognizable Russian on
October 1st 1963 a man called the Soviet
consulate and identified himself as Lee
Oswald this man also stated that he had
been at the consulate on Saturday the
28th the translator noted that this was
the same man who had called the
consulate a day or so ago and had spoken
in broken Russian from this information
and possibly a voice comparison the
September 28th caller was identified as
Oswald
the problem with assuming that the
caller on September 28th and October 1st
was Oswald is that Oswald spoke fluent
Russian granted mr. Ann's denial of the
Saturday visit and the proficiency of
the callers Russian is not sufficient
evidence to conclude that the person who
visited the Cuban consulate on Saturday
and who called the Soviet consulate on
Saturday and on October 1st was an
impostor yet the information is
sufficient to question the assumption
that it was Oswald especially in light
of as cues and Duran's descriptions and
Elena Guerrero deposit allegation the
committee notes the possibility but does
not conclude that the missing production
from the pulse camera and the Li lyric
base has something to do the possibility
that someone impersonated Oswald in
Mexico the recalls that also occurred
early on September 27 1963 may have been
by an impostor at approximately 10:30
a.m. a man called the Soviet military
attache looking for a visa to odessa and
was referred to the Soviet consulate at
10:37 a.m. a man called the Soviet
consulate and asked for a visa to odessa
he was told to call back at 11 o'clock
at 1:25 p.m. a man called the Soviet
embassy and was told the Consul would
return between 4:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
that day
while only the callers requests for a
visa to Russia
Odessa connect these calls to Oswald the
HSC a believes that they do fit
logically into a time sequence created
by what is known from testimony and the
electronic intercepts about his actions
on that day for example the following is
a reasonable possible chronology of
Oswald's actions on September 27 1963
based on analysis of the available
evidence
Oswald probably arrived in Mexico around
10:00 a.m. on September 27th by 10:30
Oswald had time to arrive at the hotel
del commercio and to place a call to the
Soviet military attache who referred him
to the console the military attache also
gave the caller directions to the
consulate
during the 1037 am called to the
the caller learned that he could contact
the Soviet consul at 11 a.m. this done
Oswald then visited the Cuban consulate
where he arrived around 11 a.m. on his
way to the Soviet consulate this meeting
lasted only approximately 15 minutes
Oswald was then sent to obtain
photographs and to the Russian embassy
to get the necessary Russian visa Oswald
returned to the Cuban consulate around
1:00 p.m. at this point he had his
encounter with askew and completed his
application Oswald realized at this
point that he would have problems
obtaining the visas after this visit to
the Cuban consulate which lasted
approximately 15 minutes Oswald tried to
contact the Soviet Consul whom Oswald
claimed had assured him that he would
have no problems obtaining a visa
hence the 125 call during this
conversation Oswald learned that the
console would be in that evening between
4:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Oswald returned to the Cuban consulate
at 4:00 and Sylvia Duran called the
Soviet Consul on his behalf
hence the 405 and 4:25 p.m. calls
involving Duran but there is a problem
with attributing the first three calls
on September 20
1963 - Oswald the conversations are all
in Spanish with the exception of the
testimony of Delgado the evidence
indicates that Oswald did not speak
Spanish
hence either the above detailed calls
were not made by Oswald or Oswald could
speak Spanish
there is not enough evidence firmly to
conclude that someone did impersonate
Oswald in Mexico on the other hand the
evidence is of such a nature that the
possibility cannot be dismissed see what
were Lee Harvey Oswald's activities in
Mexico City when the Warren Commission
wrote about Lee Harvey Oswald's
activities in Mexico City it concluded
quote the Commission undertook an
intensive investigation to determine
Oswald's purpose and activities on this
journey with specific reference to
reports that Oswald was an agent of the
Cuban or Soviet governments as a result
of its investigation the Commission
believes that it has been able to
reconstruct and explain most of Oswald's
actions during this time by Saturday
September 28th 1963 Lee Harvey Oswald
had failed to obtain visas at both the
Cuban and Soviet embassies from Sunday
September 29th through Wednesday morning
October 2nd when he left Mexico City on
a bus bound for the United States
Oswald spent considerable time making
his travel arrangements sightseeing and
checking again with the Soviet embassy
to learn whether anything had happened
on his visa application end quote
subsequent to the Warren Commission's
report the allegations of elena Guerrero
and Oscar Contreras Lartigue came to the
attention of the United States
investigative agencies the main
allegation of both these people that
they met Lee Harvey Oswald in Mexico
City remains to this day
without direct corroboration yet the
committee feels that it cannot dismiss
these allegations without giving them
any consideration the testimony of
Sylvia Duran and the Cuban consulate
officials sq and Miller about place
Oswald's last contact with the Cuban
embassy on Friday evening said
27th 1963 the transcripts from the CIA's
wiretaps on the Soviet consulate place
Oswald's last visits to the Soviet and
Cuban consulates on Saturday morning
September 28th 1963 Oswald's last
telephonic contact with the Soviet
consulate came on Tuesday October 1st
1963 Oswald's activities on the days
between September 28th and October 1st
are not clearly recorded the Warren
Commission speculated that he spent most
of this time sightseeing and making
travel arrangements it is entirely
possible that Oswald did spend some of
his time during this weekend sightseeing
and making his travel arrangements
it is also entirely possible that after
his failure to obtain his visas on
Saturday September 28th that Oswald did
not give up completely and did attend
the party where he would have come into
contact with the Cuban consular
officials and later sought help from
pro-castro students it is entirely
possible that reuben duran had a twist
party on september 30th or october first
as elena Guerrero has claimed rubin
Horacio lydia and sylvia duran all
admitted that they frequently had twist
parties in 1963 only silvia duran
recalled elena Gaudreau attending any of
the twist parties at the Duran's home
she recalled Elena and Elena's daughter
a lenita attending one twist party at
Rubens home in 1963 the other Duran's
adamantly denied that Lee Harvey Oswald
had attended a twist party at one of
their homes many of the details of Elena
got roses allegations have not been or
cannot be corroborated for example
Elena's allegation that some of the
people who had been at the party were
taken to Veracruz under the protection
of governor Lopez arias has not been
verified reuben duran denied that he had
ever discussed the assassination with
elena god o SI BOS q denied that he had
discussed president kennedy with Emilio
Caballito at a party at the Duran's home
as alleged by
llegado the committee has not been able
to verify whether or not guards were
posted outside of Elena's home in 1963
as she claims but other details of
Elena's story are very credible perhaps
the most striking is the suggestion that
Oswald's relationship with Sylvia Duran
was more extensive than just the
business contacts in the Cuban consulate
another detail is the manner in which
Elena's allegations were handled and the
manner in which this committee's
attempts to investigate those
allegations have been frustrated in 1965
elena Guerrero reported that Sylvia
Duran had been Oswald's mistress while
he was in Mexico City in 1967 this
report was confirmed by a CIA agent who
talked to Sylvia Duran the CIA station
did not consider the information
significant and told the agent to end
his contact with mr. an if that
information is accurate then that Sylvia
invited Oswald to a party would not have
been surprising Sylvia Duran admitted
that the Mexican police had questioned
her on this point but denied that she
had had an affair with Oswald mr. Wran
denied having any extramarital affairs
while she was married to Horacio Duran
this denial is not consistent with
evidence of her reputation at the Cuban
consulate a CIA penetration agent there
reported to his case officer that all
that would have to be done to recruit
Sylvia Duran whom he referred to by
using the Spanish word for [ __ ] would
be to get a blonde blue-eyed American
into bed with her there is also CIA
information that indicates that Sylvia
Duran had an affair with a Cuban
ambassador to Mexico in the early 1960s
the HSC a attempted to interview the CIA
penetration agent about Miss Duran an
interview with the agent was also
desired so as to attempt to verify
whether Elena Guerrero had created a
disturbance at the Cuban embassy on
November 23rd 1963 the committee's
attempts to interview this agent were
frustrated miss gotto Rose claimed that
she stayed at the hotel Vermont
verified by the Mexico City legal
attache on October 13 1966 Mascaro
claimed that she had been held there by
Manuel kvo whom she believed worked for
the Mexican Ministry of government in
1963 mr. Calvillo was an unwitting asset
of the Central Intelligence Agency miss
gotto claimed that she told Mr kvo her
story on November 23rd 1963 yet the CIA
Mexico City Station did not receive a
report from Calvillo on this matter
until November 24th 1964 the same day
that Elena first told her story to
American officials for these reasons it
was felt that Manuel Calvillo could well
be a key to determining the veracity of
Miss gotto Rosa's story
the committee's attempts to interview
mr. caballo were also frustrated
there is also circumstantial
corroboration of Miss gotto Rosa's
allegations regarding June Cobb sharp
for example Ms Cobb was indeed a CIA
agent
and she did file the first report of
miss kau Rosa's story it should be noted
that this first report was accurate in
its detail in that Miss gotto Rosa's
story remained essentially the same in
subsequent repetitions miss Garrow
claimed that she kicked miss Cobb out of
her house there is a notation on miss
Cobbs report that she was not able to
regain access to miss Garrow the
committee attempted to obtain an
interview with Miss Cobb but was once
again frustrated reviewing the manner in
which the CIA Mexico City station and
the legal attache office in Mexico City
handled miss gay roses allegations
reveals that at best her allegations
were handled in an irresponsible manner
because they were dismissed after a
superficial investigation the first
report that came to the CIA was misfiled
and forgotten the Lea got after talking
to Elena dismissed her story after
interviewing one person whom she said
may have been at the party the manner in
which the official American community
handled Charles Thomas's reporting is
detailed in section 6 c11 above
mr. Thomas speculated in 1969 about why
miss Garrow says story had been largely
ignored by the American officials in
Mexico quote it would appear that
whereas the FBI has discounted the elena
Gaudreau allegations the CIA is still
considerably disturbed by them the CIA
may not have pressed for further
investigation however for a number of
reasons one considering the sensitive
overlap and subtle competition between
two intelligence collecting agencies it
had to yield to the FBI's clear
jurisdiction too there are obvious
complications in conducting such an
investigation in a foreign country three
redacted and for some of the people
appearing in the Elena Gaudreau scenario
may well be agents of the CIA under the
circumstances it is unlikely that any
further investigation of this matter
will ever take place unless it is
ordered by a high official in Washington
end quote
the committee attempted to locate Elena
Gatto although the committee established
telephonic contact with Miss Garrow the
committee was totally frustrated in this
aspect of its investigation but yet
believes that there is a possibility
that Lee Harvey Oswald did attend a
twist party at the home of reuben duran
the committee also considers it possible
that Lee Harvey Oswald contacted
pro-castro students at the National
Autonomous University of Mexico
Universidad Nacional autnoma de Mexico
hereinafter UN a.m. as claimed by Oscar
Contreras Lartigue Sylvia Duran admitted
that she had told Oswald of two ways in
which he could get a Cuban visa one he
could get an in transit visa by first
obtaining a visa to another communist
country such as Russia two he could
obtain a regular Cuban visa by knowing
someone in Cuba who would vouch for him
it is possible that after Oswald's
attempts to obtain a visa by the first
method were frustrated on Saturday
September 28th that he made one final
effort to locate someone trusted by the
Cuban consulate to vouch for him there
is no direct evidence about
how odd wolde could have learned of the
pro-castro group at un a.m. there is a
possibility that ernesto la Feld Miller
a friend of the dorrance who borrowed
Horatio's car often took Lee Harvey
Oswald to the campus of the National
Autonomous University on the days when
Lee Harvey Oswald allegedly visited the
consulate mr. Miller did also it is
possible that Sylvia Duran asked him to
escort Oswald to the campus
mr. Miller denied having ever met Oswald
Oscar Contreras says that Oswald first
contacted him as he was leaving a
roundtable discussion at the school of
philosophy it is known that in 1963 the
Duran's were close friends with the
chairman of the philosophy department at
un am Ricardo Guerra who held seminars
on Kant Hegel and Marx in the Duran's
home it is possible if Sylvia Duran had
more than just a purely business
relationship with Oswald that she
referred as Wald to one of gather as
Marxist seminars in his search for help
unfortunately Contreras does not name
who headed the roundtable discussion at
which he met Oswald
Sylvia Duran denied that she referred
Oswald to anyone for help Ricardo Guerra
is presently the Mexican ambassador to
East Germany and was not available to
the committee for an interview on both
of the committee's trips to Mexico the
Mexican government told the committee
that mr. Contreras would be made
available for an interview the interview
never occurred
although the committee's attempt to
investigate mr. Contreras his allegation
met largely with frustration the
allegation cannot be dismissed
D was Lee Harvey Oswald alone while he
traveled to Mexico the Warren Commission
concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald
traveled alone while he was in Mexico
all of the witnesses with the exception
of Elena Guerrero de Paz who stated that
Oswald was accompanied by two beatnik
looking boys at Ruben Duran's party have
stated that when they saw Oswald in
Mexico he was alone although the
American authorities did not
handle the elena guerrero allegation
properly the committee does not believe
that it can readily dismiss miss
Guerrero's allegation that Oswald had a
companion in Mexico in light of one the
corroboration of details of Miss gotto
Rose story to the possibility that
someone impersonated Oswald in Mexico
and three the similarity in the
description of Oswald by mr. an and mr.
askew and the description of Oswald's
companion by miss Garrow